README.md, before:

# gempost

gempost is a minimal static site generator for publishing a blog (gemlog) on
the [Gemini protocol](https://geminiprotocol.net/).

You store metadata about each gemlog post in a sidecar YAML file, and gempost
generates a gemtext index page and an Atom feed.

You can use a [Tera](https://keats.github.io/tera/) template to customize the
format of the index page. You can also use a template to customize the format
of the gemlog posts themselves, such as to add a copyright footer or a
navigation header to each post. There are examples of both under
[examples/templates/](./examples/templates/).

The metadata in the sidecar YAML file allows you to generate an Atom feed with
rich metadata, but most of this metadata is optional and not necessary to
generate a working feed.

## Examples

- See [examples/gempost.yaml](./examples/gempost.yaml) For an example config
  file you can use to get started.
- See [examples/metadata/](./examples/metadata/) For examples of the sidecar
  YAML metadata files.
- See [examples/templates/](./examples/templates/) For examples of index page
  templates and post page templates.

## Templates

The index page template has access to a `feed` variable which is a Feed object.

The post page template has access to an `entry` variable which is an Entry
object.

### Author object

- `name` (string)
- `email` (string, optional)
- `uri` (string, optional)

### Entry object

- `uri` (string)
- `title` (string)
- `body` (string)
- `summary` (string, optional)
- `updated` (string, RFC 3339 format)
- `published` (string, RFC 3339 format, optional)
- `author` (Author object, optional)
- `rights` (string, optional)
- `lang` (string, optional)

### Feed object

- `title` (string)
- `updated` (string, RFC 3339 format)
- `subtitle` (string, optional)
- `rights` (string, optional)
- `author` (Author object, optional)
- `entries` (array of Entry objects)

Commit message:

Add minimal example of post template file

README.md, after:

# gempost

gempost is a minimal static site generator for publishing a blog (gemlog) on
the [Gemini protocol](https://geminiprotocol.net/).

You store metadata about each gemlog post in a sidecar YAML file, and gempost
generates a gemtext index page and an Atom feed.

You can use a [Tera](https://keats.github.io/tera/) template to customize the
format of the index page. You can also use a template to customize the format
of the gemlog posts themselves, such as to add a copyright footer or a
navigation header to each post. There are examples of both under
[examples/templates/](./examples/templates/).

The metadata in the sidecar YAML file allows you to generate an Atom feed with
rich metadata, but most of this metadata is optional and not necessary to
generate a working feed.

## Examples

- See [examples/gempost.yaml](./examples/gempost.yaml) For an example config
  file you can use to get started.
- See [examples/metadata/](./examples/metadata/) For examples of the sidecar
  YAML metadata files.
- See [examples/templates/](./examples/templates/) For examples of index page
  templates and post page templates.

The examples of metadata and template files are split into "minimal" examples
that will get you started, and "complete" examples that demonstrate more of the
features of gempost.

## Templates

The index page template has access to a `feed` variable which is a Feed object.

The post page template has access to an `entry` variable which is an Entry
object.

### Author object

- `name` (string)
- `email` (string, optional)
- `uri` (string, optional)

### Entry object

- `uri` (string)
- `title` (string)
- `body` (string)
- `summary` (string, optional)
- `updated` (string, RFC 3339 format)
- `published` (string, RFC 3339 format, optional)
- `author` (Author object, optional)
- `rights` (string, optional)
- `lang` (string, optional)

### Feed object

- `title` (string)
- `updated` (string, RFC 3339 format)
- `subtitle` (string, optional)
- `rights` (string, optional)
- `author` (Author object, optional)
- `entries` (array of Entry objects)
